# Assessment

Generally, facilitators work with the materials the professor prepares. The professor will outline what material she or he considers essential to be covered in an exam, and will also communicate what he or she expects of you in assisting the students to prepare for the exam.

## Preparing Students

Given the enormous stress that most students feel over finals, they will appreciate any help you can offer them. But keep in mind that you will also be making your job easier in preparing the students for the exam, if only because it will prevent complaints later. You can meet with individual students or groups of students during your office hours, though you will quickly find yourself repeating the same advice. The most efficient way to help is to moderate a study session. Note the choice of the word “moderate.” You are doing your students an enormous favor in holding a study session, but you should not get carried away and essentially do their work for them.

The best approach is to hand out sample identifications or essay topics provided by the professor at your last discussion meeting before the exam. At this point, divide up the list among those interested in attending a study session, and make each student responsible for outlining—and only outlining—a useful answer or identification. If you have prepared well, you have already reserved a classroom and a time for the review session. At that meeting, you may want to begin with a few general rules to follow during the exam—essentially a summary of the expectations of the professor. For instance, you may tell students to avoid rhetorical flourishes and padding. It is not the length of the answer that matters but the precision. Add that they must write neatly; if you cannot read what is written, you will assume that it is incorrect. (One of the oldest tricks of test taking, dating back to classical Greece, is to deliberately obscure one’s writing in the hope that the grader will assume the answer is correct.)

Now comes the heart of the review session. Ask the student or students who tackled the first problem to write their outline(s) on the board and to explain the logic of their structure. Your task at this point is simply to question the comparative worth of details. By this time in the semester, the students should be talking fairly freely with one another, and you can count on the other students to point out errors or failures of logic.

Once you have moved through all the problems in turn and covered the boards with sample outlines, you may want to repeat the basic expectations for the exam. Specifically, you can remind students what is considered an excellent answer and what constitutes a barely acceptable one. If students are convinced that they understand the nature of the exam, they will be much more comfortable taking it, and they will produce better work. It is vital that you remember how important it is for students to do well on the final. With a review session, you not only allow students to provide one another with sample outlines but also encourage them to think about the problems before them.
