# Leading Discussions


For most facilitators, the majority of class time is spent conducting discussions based on the online course (video lectures, readings, learning activities, etc.). In terms of effective facilitation, discussions are preferable to lectures (Note it is not the role of the facilitator to teach/lecture). It is easier to keep students’ attention when they are part of the discussion. Their involvement helps to ensure that they are absorbing information and alerts the facilitator to what is working and sinking in and what is not. As John Stuart Mill noted, “The interests of truth require a diversity of opinions.” And a highly interactive class is just more fun.

The key to a great discussion is preparation—not the sort of intricate organization that force-marches the students through the material, but an understanding of the topic and a conception of the key issues that need to be addressed. Advance preparation will make it all look easy to the students while allowing you the confidence to respond with flexibility to the flow of the discussion.

Note that facilitators are not the subject matter experts, so refer to the online course and facilitator’s guide for any points of confusion. When you are unable to answer a question, ask students to go back to the course materials and work together to find the answers. If there remains confusion about any course content or assignments, contact the professor.

## The First Day of Class

Your first task is to ease your students’ tension and anxieties. They are generally nervous about taking a history class that requires them to synthesize both lectures and readings at the college level. Often they do not know anyone else in the section and are scared to voice opinions in front of peers. Even though this is an introductory course, you may be surprised to learn how many of your students disliked high school history and learned little of what we understand history to be. Many students think of history as the memorization of dates. You therefore need to reassure your students that there is a lot more to history than dates and that it will be worth their time to give it a second chance. As discussed below, you can turn directly to the opening pages of the textbook for a quick introduction to the workings of history. However, if you are comfortable doing so, you may want to introduce both yourself and the subject by talking a bit about the origins of your own interest in history and what sustains that interest. Nothing—absolutely nothing—makes an introductory course more successful than the enthusiasm of the instructor for the material. Again, realizing the facilitator may not have a background in history, motivating students is a key goal of facilitating an online course.

## Icebreakers

Before addressing the subject matter, turn to your students. If you can establish even the loosest sense of community on the first day, you will find the days ahead far more pleasant, as your students will be a little less hesitant to share their judgments and far more receptive to your leadership. So get acquainted quickly, indicating that they are among friends and that what they have to say will be heard and respected. It is usually not sufficient to go around the room and ask the students to give their names. You must instead try to get a sense of their identities. One way is to ask each student to relay the standard information—name, academic year, major, where he or she is from—and then add something unique, such as a favorite song or the last book he or she read for pleasure. You may even want to write this information down on index cards as a way of helping you learn each student’s name over the first few weeks. Alternatively, try some version of the “name game”: place students in pairs and ask them not simply to tell one another their names but to say something about the history of that name; what it means, where it came from, if it originally belonged to someone else, like a grandparent. After a few minutes of letting the students talk and relax, go around the room and ask each student to tell the class about his or her neighbor. By the end of this exercise, you can be fairly confident that your students will not refer to one another as “that guy” and that they will get a sense of the personal power of history.

After spending some time getting to know one another, you may want to share with your students your goals for the semester. Even here, though, you should keep the tone light. When students first hear about an essay assignment, they often start worrying almost immediately about what they are going to write. Frame the discussion of the paper assignment within the context of questions or doubts they may have about world history. For instance, ask your students what one fact from history bugs them the most. Write those events on the board—and they will probably run a wide gamut from slavery to the invention of the shopping mall. Then ask them which single fact makes them most interested in history. The events you write on the board form a range of possible research and discussion topics.

Before the students leave the classroom, make certain that they know how to reach you, and vice versa, and also how they can reach the professor. Circulate a list and ask them to record their e-mail addresses. If you have the time, enter the list into a spreadsheet so you can send reminders to your students of upcoming assignments. They will certainly appreciate the extra effort on your part. Send out a message the day after the first class, reminding students of your office hours and the first assignment. Whatever you do on the first day, it is appropriate and advisable to keep it light and informal; a friendly atmosphere pays long-term dividends in the classroom. You may want to allow students to use your first name for this reason. They know you’re the instructor. Likewise, calling an instructor by his or her first name does not necessarily diminish respect. But if you want to be called “Mr.” or “Ms.”, it is best to make that clear up front by introducing yourself that way.

## Preparing to Facilitate a Learning Lab

This model for facilitating TWU online courses is very new and will evolve. It stems from the idea of the tradition teaching assistants who lead sections in introductory survey courses. Even though you may have studied history in your previous undergrad courses, that does not necessarily mean that you feel prepared to facilitate this course. To repeat some sound advice from another venue: Don’t Panic. Just think of the textbook and online course as your guide. You will quickly find that there are a number of ways to get yourself ready for the Learning Lab.

The most common initial response is despair over the seeming ignorance of the majority of the undergraduates. Facilitators often enter their first classes with high expectations of the stimulating conversations before them, only to discover that, as every study in the last twenty years has found, college students have retained very little of their high school history coursework. While it is therefore safe—and helpful—to assume that you know a great deal more about the subject matter than most of your students, it is a grievous error to treat those students with contempt. You can have confidence that your greater knowledge allows you to avoid the hurdles of overpreparation for a fifty-minute discussion. Remember also that it is a mistake to denigrate students for their lack of preparation; it will only make your job harder. Effective teachers, like all great craftspeople, work with the materials at hand. Your task is to guide your students, not some idealized version of what a student should be. And, you can feel rather comfortable that you will not be boring your students with well-known material; it is most likely new to them.

There is no rule on how much time to devote to preparing for your class. If you are discussing a theme with which you are personally very familiar, you may find yourself simply walking in to lead the discussion or activity. On the other hand, if you have never studied the topic at hand, you may find yourself spending more time reviewing the material. Note again that this is an online course, so there is no teaching during the lab, simply guiding students through the scripted learning activities listed in this Facilitator’s Guide.. That being said, you may want to read the text and any supplemental works assigned.

But you may not feel prepared for a class just because you have read and outlined the chapter and stuck some bookmarks into the textbook. Class discussions rarely follow logical schematics of discourse, and your job is not just to summarize what the students read. Before class it would be helpful to imagine the types of questions you are likely to receive and consider how you will demonstrate the larger issues under consideration. It is very helpful in this context to get together with at least one other facilitator and compare notes. You will probably notice that you have outlined the material in very different ways. Of course, this divergence is the very nature of history. Historians do not select the same facts or events for their interpretations of the past, nor do they structure their arguments similarly. But just as we learn from reading scholars with whom we disagree, so you can enhance your voice in the classroom by getting a sense of how other educated people address the same subject. In that regard, your premier source for intellectual comparison should the assigned reading, but you can also contact the instructor if you have some significant questions about the course materials or subject matter..

## Getting Started

At first thought, nothing is more difficult than starting a lively conversation with twenty or thirty students—many of whom may not want to talk—about a historic topic of little apparent relevance to modern life. But teachers have developed a number of very effective techniques over the years that you are free to borrow from—a few of which follow. Observe good teachers and note their techniques, appropriating whatever works for you.

An effective discussion should not only clarify the meaning of the lectures and texts but also provide a network of ideas which, by connecting the material, will allow students to see the big picture. The key is to get your students’ attention early on and maintain it. An energetic beginning will make a strong impression on your students, allowing you to keep their interest and providing the framework for the entire discussion.

You will quickly notice that many of your students have not yet learned the necessary analytical skills to make connections between the lecture and the assigned reading or to formulate independent interpretations. It would be wise for you to get in the habit of discussing the texts from the start and explaining to students the importance of substantiating their comments with evidence from the textbook or lectures. At the very first meeting, turn to the first page of the textbook. Even if you have reason to believe that no one has done the reading, or rather precisely because you think no one has done the reading, draw everyone’s attention to the opening passages of the book.

The students should be drawing on information gleaned from the lectures and textbook to construct their own understanding of historical development; your role will be more that of a moderator than an instigator.

## Effective Methods

There are, of course, a number of different methods for getting off to a quick and successful start. Try diving into the middle of the chapter to lift out a single fact that allows the students to explore the specifics of an argument.

Similarly, stories and quotations that outrage students’ modern sensibilities are very useful. By marking up your own copy of the textbook, you can guide the students through a thoughtful consideration of what might otherwise be too easily dismissed as a tragedy—an easy categorization that precludes an appreciation for the historical forces at work.

## Explaining Historiography

One of the most difficult yet exciting lessons of history for undergraduates is the discovery that the discipline of history changes constantly. The facts of a given event can be altered to suit some later purpose, only to be “discovered” decades later.

For example, you could read a selection from an older text, one that is forty years old or more, and turn to a passage that will be clearly outdated to today’s readers. You can then point out the authors were the most prominent scholars of their day, so their take on history fairly represents what was considered “objective reality” in those years.

There are many reasons for beginning with such a text, not the least of which is to get the students’ attention immediately. But a major part of what you should hope to accomplish in your Learning Labsis to show the students how historians work and how much we have learned in just the past few decades. The students gain a noticeable confidence in formulating their own historical perspectives through an appreciation of history as a work in progress.

## Sustaining Focus

The easiest way to sustain a focused discussion is to require the students to do most of the work. There are a number of short assignments that can help you attain this end. For example, have students select a single passage in the reading that most captures their attention, have them bring a single question to class, or have them write a hypothesis on a theme covered in the lecture with one piece of supportive evidence drawn from the text. These assignments will lay the basis for deeper discussion and the innovative exercises described below.

## Role-Playing Exercises

One of the most successful routes to a lively conversation is that of having the students take sides in a debate and/or role play historical circumstance. Examples of role-playing exercises are included in the Learning Lab materials.

## Making Connections

Students will undoubtedly find some issues more difficult than others and will need help making sense of what seems to them a very complicated connection. It is vital to remain aware of gaps in your students’ understanding. If your class does not grasp the foundation of a specific historical sequence, students will not be able to follow its development. For example, without an understanding of what drove Europeans to the Americas, a discussion of the impact of that conquest on Europe and the Americas will become completely muddled. This is not to say that you should move at a stately pace, page by page, through the text. Rather, touch on the key passages to ensure that vital concepts are grasped and that your students are constructing the historical causality. It is obviously not possible to discuss everything, but you can rely on the students to come up with some of the more interesting details of the landscape that lay between the peaks.

## Attention-Getting Devices

Occasionally, you will get the sense that the students’ collective attention is lagging. There are varieties of effective attention-getting devices available—voicing an outrageous assertion or quotation, calling on students by name, or even the old classic, “This will be on the final.” (The latter can induce a bit of anxiety, which some say reduces attention, so it may best be used as an obvious joke.) One can also be less dramatic and play on the desire of students to generalize about history by culling examples, metaphors, and analogies from the textbook and then asking students to expand on their representative value. If none of these approaches works, you may just want to try a complete change of pace, telling the students that you will return to these questions later (be sure to do so), and attack the issue from a completely different direction. If you resort to the latter tactic, it is useful to flip back a page or two, and get a running start. Try asking about something that you are sure the students must know as a way of building momentum and getting opinions out in the open. Often the students themselves will then return to your earlier question with a loud “I get it\!” (For further ideas, see “Dealing with Problems” in this guide.) The purpose of using these exercises in discussion building is to link the knowledge available in the textbook and lectures with the individual students’ reasoning powers.
