# Effective Facilitation

The point of teaching is to be effective, to impart a body of information and a mode of analysis. As you start facilitating this course, the clearer your own perception of the workings of history may become, an insight that cannot but improve your teaching. There are several ways of improving your teaching and facilitation skills. Ask your students for written evaluations, and read them carefully. With time, you may find these evaluations valuable components of a job application. Be honest with yourself in identifying weaknesses, and work to correct flaws. Some methods of self-examination are more attractive than others; videotaping your class is painful but valuable. Just as you encourage your students to show their rough drafts to friends, invite your professors into your classroom, so that they can suggest improvements and later attest to your teaching abilities in letters of recommendation.

Much of what is offered in this brief guide is given to you in the spirit of exploration. A great deal can be learned from talking with and observing experienced teachers, but that does not mean you should try to become some ideal type of a college professor. You will quickly discover your own voice and style as a facilitator, and you should have no trouble retaining your sense of humor in the process. Do not hesitate to experiment—and abandon an idea if it flops. Some approaches work for some facilitators and not for others. Do not be afraid to try something new. It is your Learning Lab, your career—and facilitating should be fun. With music, as Duke Ellington said, “If it sounds good, it is good.” With teaching, if it works for you, it is good teaching.
