# Sorting Problems

Facilitating a course at a TWU FAR Centre carries with it problems large and small. Keep the distinction clear and avoid making problems that are easily solved into complicated situations that drain you of time and energy. An overly aggressive student whose conduct borders on sexual harassment is a large problem. A student who comes to you with tales of woe may become a large problem. Do not—repeat, DO NOT—attempt to deal with these large problems yourself. Every college employs people who are trained to handle these kinds of problems. At the very least, it is your professor who should address any complicated issues or threatening situations. Report any such matters to the professor immediately, and let others with more authority or professional preparation cope with them. Careers have been cut short by a facilitator’s conviction that a major confrontation or talk of suicide was a joke. Disengage yourself as quickly as possible from an undergraduate’s personal problems, and allow people with more experience and resources to take over.

What is mainly of concern to you are the little problems that arise as you learn any new skill. No one is a born teacher any more than anyone is a born bicycle rider. Every teacher makes mistakes and confronts roadblocks; recognize them as part of your training, identify the problem, and work on it. Talk with your fellow facilitators (if possible) or the professor about a specific difficulty, and learn how they dealt with it. While students are most creative in inventing new crises for teachers, there are a few common difficulties you may encounter that you should consider.

You may not suffer from this trauma, but many students have a deep fear of speaking in public. You may observe a student who is a blabbermouth in the cafeteria yet clams up in your classroom. Usually, these students are just afraid of making fools of themselves. There are several ways of getting a shy student, or most of a quiet class, to participate. The first step is to avoid phrasing questions in a manner that implies only one answer (factual questions aside). Having the class write their responses to a specific question and read them out loud in class is very effective; even shy people feel safe reading aloud something they have already written. Breaking the class into smaller groups responsible for developing reactions to a historical problem also draws quieter students into the conversation, though you need to be particularly alert to the dynamic of each group.

On the other extreme are those who participate too much. A private conversation during your office hours is the best way to let a student know that, while you appreciate his or her contributions to the class discussion, you would like his or her help in drawing out some of the quieter students. All but the dimmest students will get the hint.

Often in the course of the day, you will find your class getting bogged down. Petty debate over minor details or a frustrating inability to understand the larger issues can prevent you from making steady progress. Worse still, you may discover that none of the students has done the assigned reading. It is important on these occasions not to lose your temper. Try, literally, to focus students’ attention on something different. Illustrations in the textbook are especially effective for changing direction in a conversation or bringing home a point. Ask questions about the illustrations that require students to reflect on specific issues raised in the text or lectures.

Illustrations have a way of waking up students and inspiring those who are most disengaged. Even a picture lacking obvious drama can bring forth deep passions and insights. The textbook allows you to bring history to life and ensures that your class discussions reflect that drama.

There may be occasions when none of these methods works or when the problem persists class after class. Outstaring students is generally not a good approach. Students, like most people, hate extended silences. Make the silence itself a point worthy of discussion: “OK, my friends, why doesn’t anyone want to talk today?” Such a question may evoke laughter and cause students to admit that they just don’t get it or that none of them has done the reading. For those who don’t get it, go back to the book, open it up, and start parsing a passage. To deal with students who simply fail to do the work, it may just be appropriate to remind a student or the entire class that “F” is an option.

Better still, though, you can avoid such confrontations by careful preparation. It is important to remember that students want to resolve the intellectual problem under consideration. Begin by reaching an agreement on the nature of the topic under discussion, and keep clarifying that issue and where you are in the process—for instance, defining, suggesting hypotheses and evidence, evaluating alternatives—involving the students as much as possible. If you get a sense that many students are overwhelmed by the reading, provide them with questions beforehand to guide them through the material. It is vitally important to make sure students have done the reading, even if you are not confident of their level of understanding. Thus, recall the importance of never denigrating an initial interpretation; rather, build on it, find something positive to say about every comment, rephrase silly comments (and yes, there are dumb questions), write key phrases spoken by students on the board to encourage a sense of responsibility and pride in one’s words, and link the comments of one student with those of another to get them to talk to each other and not just to you. Such extra energy early on will convince students that they can master the material and offer something of value. Nourish that confidence, as it is the very foundation of education.
