# Writing
## Helping Students Generate Topics

Most professors supply paper assignments. As you already know, these assignments take many forms. Some draw entirely on the assigned reading, which reduces your responsibilities substantially. Others require the students to go to the library. At this point, many students will need your help. You might find the resource “[<span class="underline">Developing a Research Question</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UtZJbLmZErluhAXdvfJlehEmzP3xbb_iyRB5BAaw7qs/edit#heading=h.11cqdv9timv)” helpful at this stage. Your first task is often to clarify the difference between primary and secondary sources. (See the resource: “[<span class="underline">Finding and Using Historical Sources</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kQjrQcl09iE-fIBPaxVIynmW-Q9rzqhOSTvQNdZJeKY/edit#heading=h.myqkeslwcikp)”). Explain that primary sources are the building blocks of history and that each historian is capable of reading these sources differently, often in dramatically distinctive ways. This would be a good time to direct students to the resources: “[<span class="underline">Essay Proposal Instructions</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bKN1_FRT6KtO1aUal0mHK1DH-1mjepN1AvH0ilcuLK8/edit#heading=h.374cb41hgkuv)” and “[<span class="underline">Research Essay Instructions</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tMT1OoGBBX6FfJAj4iI7ibT2R7fOmskTWjiXCePrr24/edit#heading=h.9519xdia80g4)” and hand out the “[<span class="underline">Guidelines for Writing a Good History Essay</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vk97KyAKBDUxD6d-tSfTymEo3FEokfQ0phK5NRMwSqY/edit)” and “[<span class="underline">The Use of Sources in Writing Research Papers</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jd93WPifRAb7OgJmRlMc37r8k7mP761uc2IAs6ChMkw/edit#).” Unless your library has an especially good tour of its resources, it is well worth the time to go through the library website as a class, and show them how they can locate and use the resources.. You may also want to contact the TWU librarian to conduct a synchronous Zoom session, or to ask about other library resources. See the [<span class="underline">Student Resources</span>](https://far.twu.ca/guides/facilitating-a-far-centre-course/student-resources) section in the FAR Centre Facilitation guide for more information on the TWU Library and other student support.

You will probably note that many professors operate on the assumption that, at least in introductory courses, there is a difference between first and later assignments. With the first essay—often the student’s first college paper—it is best to offer topics with precise alternatives, such as: “Was the United States justified in declaring war on Germany in 1917?” or “Did Europeans’ demand for natural resources and their military superiority give them the right to expand their empires in Asia and Africa after 1880?” You can draw attention to very specific parts of the textbook as starting points for discussion. While such categorical assignments posed as questions (rather than the deadly “explain” or “describe”) do not determine the individual student’s essay, they do provide a clear sense of alternatives on which the student can build his or her analysis. And, students will proceed more logically in their research if they perceive the need to answer a historical question and take a definite position on a scholarly question. By the time they receive the final paper assignment, students should be able to construct an independent thesis without needing such blatant directional markers.

## The Writing Process

Much of your work as a facilitator will be devoted to guiding essay assignments. It is advisable to offer extra office hours during the week before a paper is due. In these consultations, many students will essentially ask you for their thesis. Avoid the impulse to provide one. You will need to ask many leading questions (e.g., “Do you think that world security was threatened by Germany in 1917?” or “How did Europeans’ exploitation of colonial peoples and resources affect Asian and African societies after 1880?”), and you may think the student’s thesis lacks depth, but you do not want to be accountable for the paper when it comes time to grade it. And remember, many students try to distance themselves from responsibility for the final product. Do not let them say “your paper”; it is “my paper.”

The single most common gripe about history classes is this comment: “It was not an English class, and yet I was graded on my grammar.” You therefore need to explain, in the strongest possible terms, that writing clearly is an absolute necessity. A history course requires the same level of writing as any composition class. History papers are not the regurgitation of facts but the expression of a mode of analysis. It does not matter how good an idea is if no one can understand it. If a student seems to be struggling with writing, make sure to let her or him know what resources are available on your campus or online, such as writing centers and tutor services. See [<span class="underline">Student Resources</span>](https://far.twu.ca/guides/facilitating-a-far-centre-course/student-resources) for more information on the TWU Writing Centre and how students can book appointments for online sessions.

Make clear the expectations for student writing assignments. You may want to establish certain recommendations for the preparation of a superior essay. Generally, it is wise to keep such guidelines brief so that students will actually read them. (Use the handout “Guidelines for Writing a Good History Essay” as an example.).

The very last point in the writing guidelines handout on plagiarism (see: “[<span class="underline">Proper Source Citation and Plagiarism Examples</span>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gCPBKdIK683fqr1CI0Y40e2V0m7j1jzIJ6TUe1AGQB0/edit#heading=h.gjdgxs)”) may require further guidance. When defending themselves against accusations of plagiarism, some students may say: (1) “The teacher did not explain plagiarism,” (2) “My culture/former school/other professors permitted copying directly from the book,” and (3) “I printed the wrong file from my computer.” None of these is a good excuse, but it does not prevent students’ repeated attempts to use them. Therefore, it is imperative that you hand out precise explanations of plagiarism in a hopeful effort to prevent problems.

Plagiarism is usually fairly easy to discern, as you will note the complete absence of grammatical errors or the use of obscure archival sources. Proving plagiarism is a very difficult and time-consuming task, unless the miscreant plagiarizes from the textbook (a great deal more common than you might think). If you suspect plagiarism, inform your professor immediately. Note that as the professor marks all assignments, he will check for plagiarism.
